Soil to prepare and winter care.


John Innes no.3 compost and horticultural grit, and a few people preferring the more traditional bonsai approach of akadama & pumice.
The choice of soil you used is important to supply your tree with sufficient nutrients, allow good drainage and provide enough aeration and water retention to maintain a healthy tree. A Strong vigorous tree starts at its roots. We need to encourage the development of fine, fibrous ‘feeder’ roots that consume the nutrients and feed the tree. Without a strong network of root’s, the tree will become week and susceptible to pests and decease. Root growth requires air, water and nutrients. To provide this the soil needs to provide aeration, drainage & water retention.

An organic compost containing dead plant material (including peat, moss, leaf-litter, bark, perlite and sand) will break down over time, and become compacted. This will reduce drainage and make it difficult for the tree to receive oxygen.
Fine Gravel or Grit is often used in addition to other materials to provide good drainage, however, we need to maintain some water retention, so it cannot be used on its own, as some water retaining material is required.
Akadama is a clay-like material which originates in Japan. It is often used for its water retention properties. The granules are baked to create a gravel like substrate and remove pests & decease for export. However, akadama is rather expensive, requires sifting to remove dust, and breaks down over time, losing i’s water retaining properties and requires replacing after a couple of years.
Cat-litter can often be used as a cheaper alternative to akadama
Pumice is volcanic rock. It is light weight and porous. Pumice will retain some moisture but is generally considered as a dry medium that improves drainage. Much like gravel, pumice is very hard and should not break down.
Lava rock is another volcanic rock that is used in soil mixes for its porous properties. It’s rough, jagged surfaces also help develop fine feeder roots.

Winter Care
During the autumn months, hardy trees prepare for the coming winter by hardening off new growth. Deciduous trees also drop their leaves to reduce moisture loss. This dormancy is important for the tree.
Full size native trees have no problem coping with winter temperatures, as their roots are deep and protected from frost. Bonsai trees that are planted in shallow pots will need some protection during very cold periods. This can be in the form of a greenhouse or cold frame. Take care not to allow tree exposure to long periods of high temperatures, as this may bring them out of their dormancy period, making their new growth vulnerable to frost.

Sub-tropical trees, require protection from the cold and wet winters, so should be placed indoors when temperatures drop below 15 degrees Celsius. When placed indoors, tropical trees require lots of light and relatively high humidity.

When overwintering your tree, only water when the soil dries out as trees don’t require much water in dormancy. Check trees for insects and infections regularly.
Winter wash
Some people apply a winter wash to deciduous trees this time of year. There are many ready-mix solutions available on the market, that you apply by spray, but Tony U makes up his own concoction. Tony’s recipe consists of the flowing; Neem oil, white vinegar (table spoon), washing up liquid (tea spoon), non-flavoured filtered water (1 litre) Mix well and apply using a tooth brush.
Cover your Moss as the viniger will kill it off.
It cold be carefully applied if you wish to clean moss off craggy bark.

You can also use diluted Lime sulfur and the ratio is about 20-1. Cover the soil is advised.

All the above is common information if you have ways and techniques that have  successful for your trees please share.

TWBC



